

Source Repository
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Initial versions held on Clarence Dang's hard disk.

After a while, this was moved into KDE CVS.

KDE then converted the repository to KDE SVN.  The source code can be
modified by anyone with an SVN account.

branches/kolourpaint/control/ - persistent, documentation and non-source
code information

trunk/KDE/kdegraphics/{doc/,}kolourpaint – current development branch for
KDE 4, for all future feature development.  On top of the normal kdelibs
dependency, you need qimageblitz.

Essentially, this is a port of KDE 3.5's KolourPaint to KDE 4 plus
heavy refactoring and a few new features.  All regressions due to the
port have been marked in the source code with "COMPAT".

It contains all fixes and features in KDE 3.5.8's KolourPaint.

branches/KDE/3.5/kdegraphics/{doc/,}kolourpaint – backport branch for KDE 3

branches/KDE/3.4/kdegraphics/{doc/,}kolourpaint – dead backport branch

branches/KDE/3.3/kdegraphics/{doc/,}kolourpaint – dead backport branch

branches/kolourpaint/1.2_kde3/ - dead, standalone release branch for KDE
3.0 (we still need to extract the binary distribution scripts from there,
for future standalone releases)

branches/kolourpaint/1.0/ - dead, standalone release branch for KDE 3.0


Coverity
~~~~~~~~

Coverity [http://www.coverity.com/] is a commercial and expensive static
source analyser that finds bugs and false positives.  They do free scans of
KDE but you need to apply to Coverity for an account to see the results of
the scans.  Many KDE developers have Coverity accounts.


Sourceforge
~~~~~~~~~~~

http://sourceforge.net/projects/kolourpaint/ is the Sourceforge project.
The admin,  Clarence Dang can give you access to this.


Website
~~~~~~~
The website is http://kolourpaint.sourceforge.net/.  You need a Sourceforge
account to modify the webpage via SSH at
shell.sourceforge.net:/home/groups/k/ko/kolourpaint/htdocs/.

The website is currently stored on Clarence Dang's computer using CVS and
copied to that path every so often.  The HTML is edited directly, although
small sections are generated from files which are not uploaded and also,
some unfinished pages are not uploaded.

It would be better if this site was hosted on KDE SVN and maintained by an
interested  web developer.


Mailinglists
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The mailing lists hosted on sourceforge are practically dead.

<kolourpaint-support AT lists.sourceforge.net> is a support address but
receives huge amounts of spam.


http://bugs.kde.org
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Some bugs are listed in the "BUGS" and "TODO" files, or marked in the
source code.  Others are listed there.


Other websites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There's a KolourPaint page at freshmeat.net and kde-apps.org.


Domain Name
~~~~~~~~~~~

http://www.kolourpaint.org/ is currently a Namesecure domain that redirects
to http://kolourpaint.sourceforge.net/.  The registrant is Clarence Dang,
who pays for the domain.

http://www.kolourpaint.com/ is registered to prevent someone else from
misrepresenting the project.  We are not really concerned about
kolourpaint.net, kolourpaint.com.au etc. since they are odd domains anyway
while .org and .com are very ordinary.



